[AUDIO LOGO]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> REGINA MEREDITH: The
most underutilized resource
on the planet has been
the female human brain,
according to neuroscience
researcher Kayla Osterhoff.
This is not just clickbait.
It's true.
Part of the reason
is that most studies
done in the fields of
medicine and psychology
are done on males.
So very little has been known
about the unique capabilities
of the female mind,
which you've made it
your life's work,
your passion, in fact.
You gave us a lot of food
for thought last time.
And since then, you have
since gained your PhD in--
let me say it right--
neuro-psychophysiology.
>>KAYLA OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: So, congratulations.
>>OSTERHOFF: Thank you.
>>REGINA: There's so much being
discovered almost by the day.
And obviously, our audience
resonated very well
with this story.
And so we want to get a
carry-on of what happened before
between us when that
information has been forwarded
quite a bit since then.
So one of the things is I
want to go back and touch on,
for those who haven't seen
the previous interview,
why is it that all
these medical studies--
it's like, tell us the
percentage of studies, too--
are all done on men?
We always think, oh, no, these
studies are male and female.
We just make that assumption.
But that's not true.
Tell us the types of studies,
the percentage of studies
that are mostly
male, and so forth
so we see the problem here.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah,
so this problem
dates back to, really,
the beginning of time,
or the beginning of scientific
inquiry, whenever that started.
And there were two
main reasons that women
were not studied or not included
in the scientific inquiry.
And that's because of, one,
women make risky research
subjects, because they can
potentially become pregnant
at any time, right?
So that's reason one.
And reason number two
is more frustrating
and really the reason
that's lingering
and the reason why women are
not included in studies today.
And that is because of
our biological complexity
in comparison to our
male counterparts.
What I mean by that
is there are more
moving parts in
the female biology.
And women's biology is
driven by the ovarian hormone
cycle, which is very different
than the male biology, which
is driven by the adrenals.
And so what all
that boils down to
is that the female biology
and physiology is constantly
changing, little by little each
day, and ebbing and flowing
through four different
significant phases each month.
And this is why I say
women are actually
four different
women every month,
physiologically speaking.
>>REGINA: Well, we have
four different seasons.
The Earth herself
has her seasons--
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely, yeah.
>>REGINA: --that reflect
these exact seasons
that you talk about in
terms of our neurobiology.
>>OSTERHOFF: Exactly.
And so because of this ebb and
flow and this constant change
in our physiology, it makes
us very difficult research
subjects.
And in fact, in 1977,
the FDA formally
banned all women of
childbearing potential
from all clinical research.
And that ban remained
in effect until 1993,
if you can even fathom that.
>>REGINA: Oh, my god.
And this is for every
kind of product--
psychological studies,
social studies, everything?
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: We've
been blocked out.
We're not even accounted for.
But as you say, the men
with their very regular type
of testosterone production
and 24-hour cycles,
it's low hanging fruit.
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely.
So what's happening is in
our modern, fast-paced,
evidence-based society,
we all want what?
Fast, cheap data.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>OSTERHOFF: The only way to get
it is to study male subjects.
And that's including
humans and animals.
Even in our animal
studies, we're
using male subjects because they
are more biologically simple.
And what this really
boils down to is
it is cheaper to
study them because you
can take data collection
from several months, which
is the requirement to study
in women, down to a few days
with men.
And you can also--
you don't have
to control for so many
factors because they're
biologically consistent, right?
So they're the same
subject every day.
Women are a different subject.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
No, I mean from a practical
point of view, it makes sense.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: But it's
basically junk data.
It doesn't apply to
half of the population.
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
So because of that gap
in our information,
that scientific gap
we don't understand women.
And the amount of data that we
have on women and their bodies
and how they really operate
and what they need in order
to thrive is minuscule
in comparison to the data
that we have on male
bodies and male biology.
And what we've
done is we've taken
that template of our science,
all the data that we have,
which is 99.9% of it-- and
that's how significant it is.
And then we have our 1% of
data that is female-centric,
or at least includes women.
>>REGINA: Geez.
>>OSTERHOFF: And we are
creating our societal structures
based on the data that we have,
which is very male-centric.
>>REGINA: Well, I suppose
it's no surprise for most
of our viewers that
society, institutions,
and so forth, the
architecture of these
have been set up
for the male mind.
Period.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: And the male emotional
model and mental model.
That's not working anymore.
They're all-- I mean,
there isn't an institution
that isn't really crumbling
to one degree or another,
in need of transformation.
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: So this seems to
me to be a key component.
Men and women have to be
able to stand side by side
and work in a
complex way together,
whether it's in education
or medicine or politics,
social structures, military.
Even in the military.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: So let's talk--
I mean, we talked about this
a little bit in our last show,
about how the female brain
would fit into the military,
because--
and we'll get into the
rest of this in a moment.
But it was so fun, that the male
brain is not particularly wired
for consequence.
But it is wired very
well for direct action.
So let's talk about
what this means
when you have male leaders in
the military and in politics
without the modulation
of the female mind.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah.
So masculine leadership,
male leadership,
and feminine leadership,
or female leadership,
are two very different
balls of wax, right?
But in our society, we
only have representation
of male leadership.
Even our female leaders
are leading in a very
male-centric--
>>REGINA: Yes, they're
adopting male patterns.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
And that's why we barely
see many female leaders.
And it's also why we see
women leaders burning out.
And we can talk about
that in a minute.
But so what we have is
this male-centric template
of leadership, which
works really well
for the male neurology.
It is actually perfectly aligned
with the male neurology, which
is wired for productivity.
It's very systematic.
It's linear.
And it's about objects in space.
It's about physical things
that you can see and tangible
results.
>>REGINA: And
actions you can take.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, exactly.
Now the female neurology
is very different.
It's wired completely
differently.
And female leadership
is very different.
It's not about what you can
see and touch and smell.
It's about what you can't see.
It's about what you can
sense, what you can feel.
So--
>>REGINA: And consequence
is a part of it.
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely.
Now the consequence
piece really goes down
to a psychological
predisposition
that men and women have.
So going back to the
beginning of time,
men have taken on the role
of provider for the family,
for the community, whatever.
And so in this role,
it is really important
to be focused on
self-achievement.
It is really important
to be focused on action
and what you can do because
your family or your tribe
or your community is relying
on you to be successful, meet
your goals, and come back
and bring what you produce.
>>REGINA: So to be clearheaded
and confident in your actions.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
And it's super important
to have that in society.
And we have it on a
global scale, right?
Now we've become a little too
focused just on productivity.
And that's where we've lost
the other side of the coin
that we really need
that is starting
to make its appearance now
through feminine leadership.
Now that is that women,
since the beginning of time,
have taken on more of a
caretaker role in society.
>>REGINA: Preservation of life.
>>OSTERHOFF: Right, exactly.
So it's about connection.
It's about consideration
of the collective.
And it's about, what is
the collective impact
of my actions?
Versus the male psychology,
which is not necessarily
so concerned about that.
It's about, what
will be the impact
on my success of these actions?
>>REGINA: So let's go ahead then
and dive in looking technically
at the differences about--
here I have some.
The denser neural network in the
prefrontal cortex of the brain.
Women have a denser
neural network.
Let's talk about the
implications of that first.
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely.
So generally, the male
brain is a larger organ.
And the female brain
is a smaller organ.
But the female brain actually
has denser neural networks
in specific areas
that are related
to these different
female-centric cognitive
capacities.
The prefrontal cortex is
one area, the hippocampus,
and the insula.
So all three of these
areas, also interestingly,
have high densities of receptors
for estrogen and progesterone.
>>REGINA: OK, so let's talk
about what each of those
are tasked with.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
Yes, so the prefrontal cortex is
kind of your lens of the world.
It's hard to generalize each
area because it's not really
how the brain works.
I know it's sensationalized as,
this area does this and this.
It's not really like that.
But in general, the
prefrontal cortex
is about your lens of the world.
And it's kind of
how you see things.
But it's also how
you see yourself.
It's also responsible for
discernment, decision-making,
and these executive functions.
That's the prefrontal cortex.
The hippocampus is
involved in memory.
That's kind of the
biggest area, is memory.
And specifically,
episodic memory
is more strong in
the female brain
than in the male brain, which
is more about working memory.
>>REGINA: Yeah, we'll get
into that in a moment.
Talk about the insula,
and then let's get back
to that working memory thing.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
So the insula is all
about emotional regulation
and emotional intelligence.
It's also about understanding
the emotional undercurrents
of a situation.
>>REGINA: Like reading a room.
>>OSTERHOFF: Exactly.
Now really interestingly,
too, about the female brain,
is it has a larger
mirror neuron system.
>>REGINA: What's that mean?
>>OSTERHOFF: So a
mirror neuron system
is taking in nonverbal
cues to understand
the emotional undercurrents
of situations.
So in the female brain, there
is this larger mirror neuron
system.
And it's attributed
to one of the factors
in intuition or female
intuition, which is literally
a real thing that,
now, we can measure
through scientific inquiry.
So this mirror neuron
system allows--
this larger, stronger
mirror neuron system
in the female brain
allows women to take
in nonverbal information,
to understand not only what
the situation might require
that is not being said,
but to also understand what
somebody else may need,
what the community may need, and
to establish stronger rapport.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK, so now we take all this.
We go back to the war room--
until war becomes extinct.
It's still here.
And so we go back to
the military as a model
just because it's so extreme.
So the ideal, it
seems to me, would
be you would want your
supreme commander to probably
be female, as it's taking
in all of this subtle data
and preservation of the species
is innately woven into that.
But then you would want to
have the right-hand man,
the strategist, be
male, it sounds like.
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely.
Yes.
>>REGINA: And then when
you go into the execution
in the field--
I mean, it really
helps, I think,
to not have consequence in mind
when you're a young soldier.
And it's very unfortunate
because these young men sign up
for the excitement of
camaraderie and battle
and everything.
And then the poor
mother is left crying
when their sons are taken down.
I mean, and this is just
kind of the way it's wired.
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely.
And it comes down to
these cultural norms
as well and just
the expectations
that we have on genders.
But it is really
important, I think,
that every leadership role that
is driving our global economy,
that is driving the
collective healing
of our world, these positions
really need to be twos.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>OSTERHOFF: A
male and a female.
>>REGINA: Consequence has
to be, long-term view.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah.
You need both.
>>REGINA: Reading the net
effect in the end really
has to be part of the equation.
And look around.
It's not, not on any level.
>>OSTERHOFF: No,
it's absolutely not.
Our collective
health in this world
and in humanity and
even the Earth's health,
it seems like we're on this
brink of breaking, right?
And the solution, I feel-- and
what I'm seeing is happening
little by little--
is honoring the feminine in
partnership with the masculine
and understanding that we
need both roles in order
to bring balance and
harmony back into humanity.
>>REGINA: Yes.
It can't be this
one-dimensional story
of these repetitive
cycles because, A,
that is not reality.
It's not the nature,
as I said earlier,
of the Earth and her cycles.
It's not the nature of
the cosmos and its cycles.
It's not the nature of beings.
We go through
troughs, and then we
go to great heights
and troughs again,
where we recollect and we learn.
And then we explore
outward again.
I mean, this is natural.
But nothing, not one system
we have is designed--
based on this.
So you're one of
the young pioneers
that's going to be changing that
for all of us in the future.
So I wanted to go back to
this working memory thing
because this is a thing that
is very frustrating for women.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: Because
you'll read something--
I mean, I research a lot, right?
So I've read a
lot of everything.
And so I'll understand
something in a subject,
feel like I have a
grasp on it enough
that I can converse on it.
But if I'm with a
man who says, no, no,
because this particular event
happened on this particular day
and this happened-- and you
start becoming overwhelmed
with these very
bald facts that are
detracting from what you feel
is the larger flow of the story.
And women generally tend
to shut up at that point,
feel like, well, OK, if I don't
have the facts at hand-- when
you can actually see
the flow of the story.
And you know the
flow of the story.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah.
So this actually goes back to
a really interesting aspect
of human development, human
neurological development.
So when studying
human babies, we
have found that the
male babies, the boys
have a stronger reaction
to objects in space.
And the female babies
have a stronger reaction
and connection to faces
and emotional output.
So because of this,
even in adulthood,
women are more
connected to emotions
and facial expressions,
where men--
males-- are more connected
to things in space.
So this actually aligns with
the different memory capacities
that we each have, right?
So with men having a stronger
capacity for this working
memory, that makes sense because
it's objects of space facts.
It's timelines.
>>REGINA: Data, facts and--
>>OSTERHOFF: Whereas women have
a stronger episodic memory,
which is about the emotional
undercurrent of the situations.
It's the story.
>>REGINA: And how the
story played out, yeah.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
So if we think
about this, how we
are teaching our young people
should align with this, right?
We should have a
combination of timeline
and facts and stories that
are just as important.
Learning those emotional
undercurrents of situations
is going to help young
women to understand history,
to understand certain
subjects, and for them
to retain that information.
>>REGINA: But how do
we get to the point
where women aren't
intimidated to speak up
even if they may understand
the episodic flow
of a historical event very well?
Stand up against the facts
that are being tossed out there
by, say, a guy.
>>OSTERHOFF: Well, it's because
we have this cultural default
to the male model and what is
important to the male model.
Now in my opinion,
this is not something
that we created on purpose it's
kind of just something that
happened because our
data is male-centric
and our world is driven
by data, evidence-based.
So because we have gotten
to this place where
the male model is
the default, what's
important for the male
model to thrive and operate
at their highest level
has become important
on a societal level.
Now the solution,
to me, is we just
need to bring awareness
around the female model.
We need to start normalizing the
female model at the same level
as the male model.
We need to start teaching the
female model, which we do not
do.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>OSTERHOFF: For instance,
if you go back into any
of your biology textbooks, go--
if you have one at home,
go back and look at it.
Page after page after page,
what are you going to find?
The male model, because
it's the default.
It's because it's what
the data that we have,
it's what we teach.
But the only place you're
going to find the female model
specifically is
when we're talking
about reproductive health.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS]
>>OSTERHOFF: Women's
health has been boiled down
to reproductive health.
And that's only one tiny aspect.
There's everything
else that we just
don't understand that
has implications on women
and their role and
function in society.
So we need to start
teaching that so that,
on a societal level,
what's important
for women to operate
and thrive becomes also
important on a societal level.
>>REGINA: It makes total sense.
Now we get into
something that's dicey.
And we have a lot to talk
about, men and dopamine.
There's so much to talk
about here, oxytocin.
But let's talk about
politics for a moment.
So the politics right now are
to degenderize the population
so we don't really
have masculine
and don't have feminine.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: But you can't get
away from that when what
we're talking about--
we are male and female.
Our brains do
operate differently.
Our bodies biologically
How do you navigate
the political landscape
when people are saying,
well, you can't divide us up
like that, male and female?
>>OSTERHOFF: Well,
what I'm talking about
is biology and neurology
and physiology.
And when I'm talking
male and female,
this is on a chromosomal level.
So even those who don't
identify as female
but were born with
the female chromosomes
carry that throughout
their entire lives.
So they still operate in the
way that we're talking about,
right?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>OSTERHOFF: So anyone, no
matter how they identify
as male or female--
and I totally understand
these issues around gender.
And I'm very cognizant and
sensitive to those things.
However, no matter
how you identify,
the scientific underpinnings--
>>REGINA: Certain
chemicals are chemicals.
>>OSTERHOFF: It is
the way that it is.
So we do need to
understand both so
that we can support all people.
Now here's the
thing where I think
we've gotten it wrong
on a societal level.
I think we can all agree,
or most of us in the world
can all agree, that we want
peace and equality, right?
But the problem is the
strategy that we've taken
to come to a place of equality.
The strategy is wrong.
What we have done is
level the playing field,
standardize everything,
and create the same playing
field for everyone to come in
and be able to play on, right?
So the problem is we actually
need a playing field that
is expansive enough
and customizable enough
to meet the unique
needs and strengths
and qualities of each person,
including male and female.
>>REGINA: Yeah, no.
That makes perfect sense.
And so we're not looking to--
oftentimes, it has been--
it's kind of a common term
that within every male is--
within the male is the
female, and within the female
is the male, and all of that.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah.
>>REGINA: But the
reality is, you're
talking about functional,
physiological,
biological,
neurological realities.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: So let
me ask you again.
This is another one because
we're coming up now and seeing
more and more of it, which is
when you go to transgender when
you're talking about taking
hormones, a female taking
male hormones, for example,
and vice versa, now
what is that doing?
What does that do to the brain?
>>OSTERHOFF: Well,
what I would assume
is it's very confusing
for the brain
because the ovarian
hormones are extremely
important and impactful for
female neurology and cognitive
development.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>OSTERHOFF: And
testosterone is also
important for the
male brain, but not
on the same level of capacity.
So when you are
eliminating or modulating
these hormones, of
course it's going
to have a physiological impact.
The problem is we certainly
don't study transgender, right?
>>REGINA: No, we're not
even studying women.
>>OSTERHOFF: If we're
not studying women,
we're not studying transgender.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>OSTERHOFF: They're an
even greater blind spot
in our scientific inquiry.
So my answer is, I don't know
because we're not studying it.
So I don't know--
>>REGINA: You can only
guess what would happen.
>>OSTERHOFF: --what those
long-term qualifications would
be, but I could imagine that
for the brain specifically,
it would be very confusing.
So we really need to
study transgender folks
and their neurology and the
impact of these hormones,
because we know that hormones
have a global modulatory impact
on everything in our bodies.
It's not just localized
to sex and reproduction.
>>REGINA: Right.
And since you said
the word globalized,
I'm going to hop back
in the conversation
because I went astray on the
politics and transgenderism
because I'm curious about it.
But one of the other
aspects of the female brain
is that the two hemispheres
along the centrioles
seem to communicate
a little more easily.
Now that seems to me like it
would have some very important
ramifications.
>>OSTERHOFF: Oh, absolutely.
It really changes everything
about what we understand
about the human brain.
How many times have
you heard like, oh, I'm
a left versus
right brain, right?
That's actually more in
alignment with the male brain,
because the male brain has more
localized, regional activity.
And it has a stronger
dominance of left or right.
But the female brain
is not really--
>>REGINA: So you
mean like vacillating
between left and right?
>>OSTERHOFF: Mm-hmm.
Yeah there's
typically-- each person,
each male will have
a propensity to be
more left- or right-brained.
And you could technically
say that about women.
But it's not a one-to-one.
It's not really an
accurate comparison.
So with women, because of
these denser neural networks,
there is more connectivity
between brain hemispheres
and regions.
So what this translates
to is a global processing
of information, a more global
processing of information.
That's why women tend to
have an easier time thinking
big picture.
They can pull in all the
different information,
including the information
that is not physically seen
or touched, that emotional
undercurrent information.
And they process that.
>>REGINA: They mix that
with all of the data
and the ordinary kind of
left-brain processing.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah.
So this goes back to
a woman's intuition,
which again, is a real thing
that we are understanding.
And I also just want to make
the caveat that intuition
and emotional processing
and productivity,
these are qualities that
all humans have, right?
But what I'm talking about is
the neurological propensity
and the strength that each
male and female has naturally.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK, so going back to
the male because we
have a lot of
women watching that
have little boys
and little girls.
And we have to see
the strengths of each.
And we're not try to condemn
them and behave like the other.
This is what I'm saying.
I think the
degenderization, that's
where it's not a good idea,
when you don't let people live
their natural state
and you're politically
trying to move them into
another state of being
and a way of
thinking and feeling
that's not accurate
for them personally.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
Well, and it also perpetuates
a couple of issues
that we have globally,
which is a loss of identity.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>OSTERHOFF: Across the globe.
>>OSTERHOFF: And when it comes
to women, this loss of identity
comes from a taught
detachment from our bodies,
from our natural
cycles and rhythms,
abilities, from the way
our brain operates because
we just didn't know
and we didn't understand.
And we thought that it was the
same for males and females.
But the solution is
honoring our differences.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>OSTERHOFF: Acknowledging
our differences.
And not trying to
get rid of them.
>>REGINA: And they work
perfectly together.
It's the two working together
that makes the whole possible.
So let's look at, now, the
little boys and the men.
Dopamine-regulated
systems, reward-driven.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about that.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah,
so the male brain
is reward-driven,
as you mentioned,
because dopamine is the
master neuroregulator
for the male neurology.
And for the endocrine
cascade that happens,
the neuroendocrine
dopamine is the supportive
driving factor there.
For women, it's very different.
It's oxytocin-regulated.
So oxytocin is the
master neuroregulator
for women, which means
that the female brain
and the female physiology
is more connection-based.
Because what is oxytocin about?
It's called the cuddle hormone.
And yes, when you hug somebody,
you can get some oxytocin.
But that's not all it is.
It's about feeling connected.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>OSTERHOFF: So it
takes us full circle
to what is that
neuropsychological gift
of the female neurology?
It's this ability to
think for the collective.
It's about being connected.
It's about
understanding emotions.
It's about compassion.
It's about empathy, right?
So it all matches
up perfectly to
this beautiful
feminine leadership,
which is different than
the masculine leadership.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and some of
this is very misunderstood.
And you almost have to turn to
fields of entertainment, films
and novels and so forth,
and music in particular,
when you think of this.
And you think, OK, the women,
they have the love hormone.
They have the oxytocin.
And so they're
concerned and they're
in love with their little
children and love, love, love.
And then what
happens is the male
seems to be marginalized
in that area, where
oftentimes the type of love
that males represent and express
in the world is
almost life-altering.
It's life-altering, in a way,
for them on a different level,
the type of love that
these beautiful songs
and books and such have
been written about.
So what is it in the
male model of love--
what is the hallmark of that
makes it so kind of extreme
and committed and focused?
>>OSTERHOFF: So committed and
focused is the core component,
because remember, the
gift of the male neurology
is productivity, right?
Being able to produce.
Even the male physiology when
it comes to how we reproduce,
it's about producing,
spreading the seed, right?
Whereas the female physiology
is about creativity,
creating life.
It's a different energy.
And it is connected in with
that love and connection
with your family.
>>REGINA: Different kind
of love than the male.
>>OSTERHOFF: Different, yes.
And with males, oftentimes
the way that they express love
will be more through the
doing, through the providing,
through the safety,
through the container.
Yeah so it's different.
But both are absolutely
so important and needed.
>>REGINA: Oh, absolutely.
And both are as intense.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, they are.
>>REGINA: It's
important to say that.
Just because men don't
create as much oxytocin,
it doesn't mean the
love isn't there.
It is.
>>OSTERHOFF: No.
But another important piece
about this oxytocin versus--
>>REGINA: Dopamine.
>>OSTERHOFF:
--dopamine regulation
is, when you look
into our society,
it's very
dopamine-driven, right?
Checking things off the
to-do list, social media, all
this stimulation, the way that
we have set up our world to be
goal-oriented and
step-by-step process,
all that is dopamine-driven.
And that's why, typically,
men have an easier time
operating in these
systems, because they're
regulated by that.
It doesn't mean that too much
dopamine isn't bad for them
just like it is for anyone.
But it is healthier.
And then for women, this
dopamine-driven society
is very problematic
because dopamine actually
squelches oxytocin.
>>REGINA: It makes total sense.
>>OSTERHOFF: And we're already
not getting enough opportunity
for oxytocin in our society.
It's not a priority even though
it's so crucial and important
for women.
And then we have all
this dopamine flooding
in that is taking those
oxytocin levels down even more.
So we're deprived from
our master neuroregulator.
>>REGINA: We're burnt out.
Women are burnt out.
I mean, I wake up, and
as soon as I open up
my computer, look at my
iPhone, and the email list,
I want to go back to bed.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: To me, it's
overwhelming and exhausting
and not enjoyable at all.
>>OSTERHOFF: Absolutely.
It absolutely is.
And that's, again--
>>REGINA: Other people, men
in particular, it's a buzz.
It's something to
engage with and tick off
number 1, 2, and 3.
We are all-- we're very
different that way.
>>OSTERHOFF: We're
very different.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about how
we start incorporating
the understanding
of the female neurobiology into
the workplace, for example.
>>OSTERHOFF: So again,
what this boils down to
is creating a more expansive,
more inclusive environment,
a playing field,
you can call it.
So kind of going back to
this playing field idea,
let's say that you
have Michael Jordan,
a player, an amazing player.
And then you have
Tom Brady, right?
He's a really great
football player.
So you have Michael
Jordan and Tom Brady.
And you drop them both
on the football field,
and you say, play
your best game.
Who's going to
play the best game?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>OSTERHOFF: They're
both amazing players.
>>REGINA: Athletes,
but different sports.
>>OSTERHOFF: But the playing
field is only adapted to one.
So that's what we
have in the workplace.
We have a playing field
that is very male-centric,
but both men and women are
dropped in and expected
to play their best game.
And they are both
amazing players.
So we need to create a more
adaptive, a more expansive,
more inclusive
playing field that
can allow the flexibility
that women need in order
to operate in this
ebb and flow way
that their body
naturally operates in.
>>REGINA: But how does
that language even start,
because first thing you're going
to have men saying, oh, my god.
Now we have to know who's on
their period and who's not.
I mean, you can see everybody
throwing their hands up
in the air because it's going to
be a messy type of convergence.
>>OSTERHOFF: Sure.
It is, while we're
building our awareness.
So self-awareness is
always step one, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>OSTERHOFF: And I work
with major corporations
around the world.
And they are actually very
extremely open to this
because they see
the problem of women
leaving the workforce by mass.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>OSTERHOFF: They
see the problem.
This is having major economic
implications for our world.
Nobody wants this
to happen, right?
So they're looking for
creative solutions.
And it's not about
menstrual leave,
not that I think that
that's a bad idea.
I think it's a fine idea.
It's not about us disclosing,
oh, I'm on my period, I'm not.
That's not what it's about.
It's about expanding the playing
field to be more inclusive.
And the biggest
piece, the one tidbit
that I would say for everyone
that you can start adopting,
is more flexibility.
I'll give you one example.
Let's say that your
goals are oriented
on a weekly basis at work,
which is typical, right?
We have these things that we
have to complete every week
and check the
things off the box.
Now if we could simply just
expand that to a month view,
then women could orient
and create their workflow
to get the same amount of
things done, but in a way
that works for them.
Because if we're expected
to operate the same way
and have the same
output and energy levels
and focus week after
week after week and day
after day after day,
it's never going to work.
And that's why women
are burning out.
So now if we simply expand
that and we allow women
the flexibility to adjust
their schedules and workflows
in alignment with their
biology, with their bodies--
and the amazing
part is they have
these different
cognitive gifts that
come online in different weeks
over the course of the month
that they could use to be
more productive in their work,
if they were allowed
to do it and if they
were taught about it.
>>REGINA: So then you look
at it in a linear sense.
And you think, OK, we've
got X number of tasks
and we have one
month to do them.
And the man is
consistent and on-task.
He's ticking off
every day because he's
dopamine and reward-driven,
dopamine-centered and
reward-driven.
OK, so you think, whoa, that's
really unfair because it seems
to me she's just kind of spaced
out and daydreaming and not
really showing up right now.
And yet, there's something
that will carry the female
through at the end for a
kind of super performance
when it's all said and done.
There are these sort
of superinfused moments
with the feminine that
are kind of superhuman.
So let's talk about
that and see, just
so the men don't feel like
it's an unfair burden.
Let's see how the
woman catches up
and this all equalizes
in its own way.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah.
So we have to stop
micromanaging people.
And we need to
allow them to work
in a way that is in
alignment with our bodies
and our natural abilities.
So during the week that we may
not have as much mental energy
and focus, we're going
to spin our wheels
if we're trying to sit down
and do that kind of work.
>>REGINA: Yeah, just drinking
coffee and feeling depressed.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah.
And we're not actually
going to be very productive.
But there are a couple of weeks
during the month where that
actually is an activity
that would be supportive
and in alignment with
our neurophysiology.
And we're going to
get a lot more done.
We're going to be so much more
productive with those kinds
of tasks during that time.
So if we allowed women
to have the flexibility
and we weren't looking over
their shoulder, saying, wait,
this week you were too
slow on your productivity,
if we just allow the
space and allow the trust,
and we all understand
what the goal
is at the end of the month, who
cares how we get there, right?
If men want to work consistently
little by little each day
to get there, amazing.
I would actually
recommend that they
do that because that is in
alignment with their neurology.
>>REGINA: Yes, yes.
Get it done.
>>OSTERHOFF: And if women
want to rest and gain
the inspiration and recover
and then hit it hard and work
longer hours and be super hyper
focused during a certain--
>>REGINA: And super
creative, because some
of these portions
of the brain are
hyper creative in the female.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, exactly.
Then we're both going to make
it to the same finish line.
And in fact, female leaders,
when we actually measure this,
they outperform male
leaders across the board.
>>REGINA: It makes sense.
But the men would argue, because
we're going through these ups
and downs emotionally, and
also in terms of the way
our mind is processing,
that we make unfit leaders
because on any given day,
you can't rely on a woman
to be very specifically on.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes, but
that's because we have
unfair expectations of women.
We have set a consistent
bar, and we said,
you have to meet this
every single day.
Not only that, but we've set a
male-centric model for society
and how success looks.
And again, because we're using
this male-centric model, that
is what we are understanding
is important in society.
So when we start to
shift that, we're
going to see that some of the
issues that we're experiencing
across the world
can be solved when
we start to elevate the
other half of the population
and bring them up to the
level and level of importance
and level of normalcy
as the male model.
>>REGINA: So it starts at
home with our children.
>>OSTERHOFF: It does.
>>REGINA: So we have, say a boy.
And we have a girl.
And the boy is on it.
He has all his skills.
I think I've written
them all down, his motor
skills, his mathematical
reasoning, his working memory,
his pattern recognition, all
these very strong male traits.
He's going, going, going.
And the girl is
dragging herself.
And then she comes up with
some brilliant, off-the-wall
solution to something.
How do parents best start
accommodating for this in home
when they both have their
tests due the same day?
They both have to
graduate in the same year.
>>OSTERHOFF: It's the
same solution, I think,
in the corporate space and for
our world's economy, which is,
we want to expand the
expectations and the playing
field to be more inclusive
of the little girls
and the different way
that they operate.
Even the way that we do
our K-12 education is
based around the male model.
Sit at the desk for
five straight hours
and do subject after subject
after subject, right?
And I don't really think
that works for any human,
to be honest.
I don't think it works
for men or women.
But it is more aligned
with the capacities
of the male neurophysiology.
So parents can start to
understand that there are
differences and that that's OK.
And what I would suggest is
to celebrate the differences.
When you see your
little boys are
more interested
in activities that
might be related
to dopamine, you
can celebrate that
and honor that.
When you see our
little girls are
more interested in connection
and creating stories
about their dolls that are
also really important for them
to understand society and how
it works, we celebrate that.
And we don't make
it lesser than.
One is not better or
lesser than the other.
They're both
extremely important.
They're just different
paths, again,
to get to the same place.
>>REGINA: So what would
you say to a mother who's
maybe a little bit
of a helicopter mom
and wants her kids to
do well and score high,
and has all kinds of
after-school activities,
and the girl is dragging?
She's not-- she's
in her low phase.
What would you
say to these moms?
>>OSTERHOFF: Well again,
remember, it's just a phase.
And it's going to be
over in less than a week.
So maybe what we
could do and say,
I know you're feeling a little
less energized right now.
And I'm going to go
ahead and honor that.
We're going to allow
you to get more rest.
I'm not going to push you
to do all of these tasks
that you need to do.
I'm going to allow you to rest.
And also, know
that next week when
I know you're
feeling better and I
know you have more
energy and more focus
and more capacity for
this type of work,
we're going to do
a little extra.
We're going to do
a couple-- we're
going to do two hours of
homework instead of one.
And I'm going to
help you through.
And we're going to learn
how to navigate this.
That would be ideal.
>>REGINA: That's so intelligent.
And so not being done.
You used to work for the CDC.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And so you
started seeing-- you saw
all these patterns playing out.
And you saw all the burnout.
And at what rate-- we talked
about this a little last time.
I'd like to know now.
What kind of rate are you
seeing of female burnout
in the workplace,
and at what ages?
>>OSTERHOFF: It's every
age, to be honest.
Our female leaders
are really reporting
this across the globe.
The most public
example of this, you
might remember from
January of this year,
was when Jacinda
Ardern stepped down
as prime minister
of New Zealand.
>>REGINA: Yes, New Zealand.
>>OSTERHOFF: And
what she said was,
"I have no gas
left in the tank."
And the reason
why is because she
had these male-centric
expectations and environment,
this playing field to work
within that was so limiting
and not in alignment with her
natural gifts and rhythms.
And then the BBC had the
audacity to ask the question,
well, can women actually
have it all, then?
>>REGINA: Right, I remember.
>>OSTERHOFF: And
the answer is no,
not if we continue to have
the same expectations of what
success is.
So I think what we need to do is
we need to understand that what
is contributing to these
excessive burnout rates, which
is more than 200%
higher in women than men
across the board
in the workplace.
And this isn't just in the US.
This is in the UK, Canada.
I'm doing a lot of projects
in other countries.
And we're finding
the same thing is
being reported from the women
in the corporate structure.
So we really need to
take a look at why.
What is the underlying issue?
And the solution isn't
just plop more women
into leadership positions.
That's just fixing the
numbers temporarily.
>>REGINA: Right, the perception,
really, more than anything.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yes.
That's not doing it,
because guess what?
We're going to plop women
into these leadership
positions in a
male-centric environment,
and they're still going to
burn out because it's not
set up for them.
It's not set up
an acknowledgment
of their unique capacities,
needs, and skills.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And your work is really--
that's what you're covering,
that you're looking
at these female cycles
so that we can see how
this starts plugging in
and where we give this
grace of time and space
to women so that we can
have the gift of all
those other incredible
mental capabilities,
including super high creativity
to whatever solutions are
being needed on a global scale.
So again, congratulations on
all the work you're doing.
And you're just beginning.
>>OSTERHOFF: Thank you.
>>REGINA: So any final thoughts
before we sign off here?
We've covered quite
a bit and a lot.
And I thank you for the
kind of functional advice.
>>OSTERHOFF: Yeah.
Well, thank you for having me.
This is so important.
And I want everyone
who is watching,
whether you're a
male or a female,
to just understand
that across the globe,
we're really disconnected from
nature and the natural phases
and cycles and rhythms.
And one way that we can
connect back in with nature
is by connecting back in with
the natural rhythms of nature,
the natural rhythms
of plants and animals,
and the natural biological
rhythms of women
that have been ignored and
suppressed for so long.
If we can all start to
acknowledge that and think
about how that
impacts how we operate
and how we relate to one another
and how we support one another,
then we can really make a
sustainable change, I think.
>>REGINA: And when you
look at it that way,
it's actually magical.
>>OSTERHOFF: It is magical, yes.
>>REGINA: Kayla,
thank you so much.
>>OSTERHOFF: Thank you.
>>REGINA: This is exciting
work, so necessary
that we begin to incorporate
these traits and gifts
side by side for the creation
of the new world we all
want to be giving birth to now.
We simply can't do it
the old way anymore.
It's not working.
The systems aren't working.
None of it's working.
So we have to start from the
ground up beginning at home.
You can connect with Kayla's
research at herbiorhythm.com.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]